money introduction
the phenomenal profit associated with
the narcotics trade is the foundation
upon which the cartels power is based
there for a concerted attack on the
cartels money laundering operations
maybe one of the most effective means to
damage the international narcotics trade
the subcommittee heard testimony from a
number of witnesses concerning the
magnitude of money laundering those
testifying ranged from narcotics
traffickers who laundered drug profits
to one of the Medellin Cartel z-- money
launderers to an authority on
international banking in reviewing this
testimony members of the subcommittee
subsequently drafted money laundering
legislation which was incorporated into
the omnibus drug bill of 1988 and
enacted into law
in October 1998 defining the problem of
money laundering the phrase money
laundering has been used to describe a
wide range of illegal financial
operations the most basic form of money
laundering is the skimming of funds from
cash generating businesses to evade
taxes the Internal Revenue Service
estimates that in 1988 some fifty
billion dollars was hidden in this way
the term is also used to describe
schemes to hide the cash produced by a
range of illegal activities including
illegal gambling prostitution and drug
trafficking estimating the size of this
underground economy is extremely
difficult for obvious reasons
however law enforcement officials have
consistently estimated that these
activities may generate as much as 100
billion dollars in illicit cash profits
each year in the United States for the
relatively small time drug trafficker
the laundering of money is simple they
spend their profits they pay the wages
of accomplices and suppliers in cash and
they use cash to purchase luxury items
such as cars jewelry and vacation homes
however as one moves higher up the drug
distribution hierarchy the profits are
so large that they cannot be completely
hidden through consumption
and capital is retained holding capital
in the form of currency is very costly
not only our secure storage and
transportation of currency prohibitively
expensive but also the opportunity costs
in terms of lost earning power are
substantial these problems can be
overcome only by depositing the money in
a financial institution which takes
custody of the currency pays interest on
the balances and can transfer funds
anywhere in the world through the use of
electronic funds transfer system the
Bank Secrecy Act restricts
money-laundering as the worldwide drug
trade mushroomed during the 1970s the
United States became the center of money
laundering activities in response to
this problem the Bank Secrecy law was
enacted in 1974 the Act requires that
all cash transactions in excess of
$10,000 must be reported monthly to the
Internal Revenue Service including Bank
and securities brokerage transactions
transactions in cash at casinos real
estate closings and even automobile boat
and aircraft purchases large shipments
of cash into or out of the country must
be reported as well the reporting
requirement was viewed as an essential
step to prevent the proceeds of crime
from being laundered the requirement
created a paper trail where by law
enforcement authorities could trace
funds invested in legitimate enterprises
to determine whether or not such funds
had their origins in criminal activities
however initial enforcement of the
currency reporting requirements of the
Bank Secrecy Act of 1974 proved to be
lacks
and significant sums of money continued
to be laundered through US financial
institutions increased attention to the
problem by the Treasury Department
brought stricter enforcement efforts
during the Reagan administration
these efforts included a much publicized
prosecution in 1985 of the Bank of
and indictments of other financial
institutions for accepting cash deposits
of over $10,000 without reporting them
in the IRS in the wake of these stricter
enforcement measures the Treasury
Department determined that financial
institutions in the United States were
increasingly complying with the
reporting requirements however Treasury
also recognized that as compliance
increased in the United States those
engaged in criminal activities were
moving more and more US currency
overseas to countries whose banking
regulations guaranteed that such
transactions would remain secret the
international loophole testimony
delivered before the subcommittee
described in detail the movement of US
currency to be laundered in offshore
banks and the methods used by both drug
dealers and bankers to avoid regulation
and detection the profits from the
international drug trade are moved to
any country which guarantees the fewest
problems for the trafficker and handling
the proceeds from the illicit activities
as a result drug money is moved to
countries such as Panama which do not
collect taxes on foreign accounts and
which provide the fewest restrictions on
the movement of US currency across their
borders the business has been highly
competitive attracting many smaller
nations which historically have served
as tax havens in order to attract
capital from around the world among the
principal money-laundering tax havens
have been the Bahamas the Cayman Islands
Hong Kong Liechtenstein Luxembourg
Monaco Nauru Singapore and the Turks and
Caicos Islands by the mid-1980s Panama
became an important Centre for the drug
trade because it offered everything a
trafficker needed Panama is
strategically located on the major route
between the United States and South
America it has very stringent bank
secrecy laws and in the figure of
general Noriega guaranteed fiscal
section of money couriers moving
currency to Panama the use of these
jurisdictions to launder drug money is
described in the case histories below
selected from the subcommittee hearings
evident in the case histories is the
ease with which drug traffickers move
money out of the United States to
foreign jurisdictions for deposit where
in turn the funds can then be
electronically transferred back into the
United States case histories cayman
islands lee rich convicted of narcotics
trafficking in 1986 ran one of the
largest marijuana smuggling
organizations ever uncovered in the
united states by the time he was thirty
years old
rich was transacting drug deals worth
hundreds of millions of dollars rich
told the subcommittee that all of his
distributors paid him in cash and that
he stored the bills in a safe house in
the tampa florida area he employed old
high school friends to count and package
the money for shipment to an offshore
banking haven where the money could be
converted into a bank deposit for rich
the ideal place was the cayman islands
renowned for its bank secrecy laws rich
held dual u.s. british citizenship and
had lived and worked in the cayman
islands he had learned that the islands
hundreds of financial institutions
existed principally to assist Latin
Americans in evading exchange controls
and taxes in their own countries these
institutions would not require any
information on deposits of large sums of
US currency rich testified that the
Cayman banks charged a 1% fee for
laundering the money which they
characterized as a fee for counting the
cash after taking such a fee the banks
would then ship the funds to the US
Federal Reserve System when rich first
began selling narcotics the amounts of
currency he handled were in the hundreds
of thousands of dollars he would place
the currency in a suitcase and fly from
Tampa to the Cayman Islands
as the amounts of cash he handled grew
and his trips became more frequent rich
began to fear that his activities would
be uncovered as rich put it quote there
was a lot of US intelligence on the
island watching the airport watching the
bank transactions their end quote
rich also learned that cayman banks were
being pressured by the u.s. not to
accept deposits from known drug
traffickers accordingly riche decided to
move his money to panama in panama rich
relied on his partner in the smuggling
operation steven Kalish to act as his
agent to deal with the Panamanians
Kalish actually bought a penthouse
apartment in panama city for use by the
organization he shuttled between Florida
and Panama and according to rich
negotiated with general Noriega to
ensure the security of the
money-laundering operation Bahamas Lois
Kojak Garcia a marijuana smuggler turned
federal government and former described
the dimensions of the currency generated
by his drug transactions by recounting
how there were times he would sit in his
spacious living room ankle-deep in 20 50
and 100 dollar bills after receiving the
money from distributors who paid him for
the marijuana he smuggled into the Miami
area
Garcia then paid his suppliers and
members of his drug organization he
claims also to have paid several
high-ranking Bahamian officials up to
two hundred and fifty thousand dollars
for permission to transship marijuana
through the Bahamas these payments still
left him with hundreds of thousands of
dollars in currency at a time which
required laundering initially Garcia
used the Bahamian banking system to
launder the profits from the narcotics
business particularly since he was
already using the islands as the transit
point for drugs coming into the United
States the Bahamas had strict bank
secrecy laws and there were no
requirements for reporting the deposit
of US currency and Bahamian financial
institutions
Garcia found that initially many
Bahamian banks were more than willing to
have his business but like the rich
Kalish organization the Garcia
organization found that increasing
pressure by the US was making the
Bahamas a less attractive place to do
business for money laundering
accordingly on the advice of Ramon
Milian Rodriguez a money launderer for
the Medellin Cartel and a number of
Cuban American narcotics traffickers
Garcia decided to join the cartel
Rodriguez and the rich Kalish
organization and laundering his profits
in Panama Panama Panama had grown into a
money-laundering center long before
general Noriega came into power in large
part as a result of banking reforms
instituted in the late 1960s bank
secrecy laws were adopted and
regulations on financial institutions
repealed which led to a virtual
explosion in the Panamanian banking
industry by the early 1970s dozens of
foreign banks opened branches in Panama
many of them geared toward attracting
the proceeds of illegal activity by the
early 1980s there were well over 100
banks in Panama and more than 50 of
those were owned by Colombians these
banks attracted significant sums of drug
money as the cartels relationship with
general Noriega grew Panama became so
successful in attracting drug money that
according to US Treasury estimates
staggering sums of currency amounting to
at least several billion dollars were
being laundered each year Panama's
development as a money-laundering center
prior to 1984 is described more fully in
the chapter on Panama a Mashhad I won
the former manager of the bank of credit
and commerce international Panama stated
in a subcommittee deposition that many
of the international banks in Panama
willingly laundered money
he said that when unusually large
amounts of cash were returned from
to the Federal Reserve Bank in New York
in 1984 the Panamanian Bankers
Association a self-regulatory
organization met to discuss how to deal
with this problem
voluntary limits on the amount of US
currency that any one bank could return
to the National Bank of Panama were
proposed they suggested five million
dollar limit was vigorously protested by
the Swiss banks and a number of large
North American banks when voluntary
limits were adopted the Swiss banks
avoided compliance by chartering
aircraft to fly currency back to Europe
I won also stated that the bankers could
get money laundering business by paying
kickbacks of one or two percent to the
owners of Brinks of Panama according to
Alan Brinks controlled the placement of
many drug deposits and for a fee would
direct the shipment of cash to the bank
which paid a commission in addition
banks which laundered money tolerated
cash skimming by officials of the
National Bank of Panama when the money
was transferred for repatriation to
offset these expenses and earn a
substantial profit the banks charged
special cash handling fees for taking in
large sums of currency marijuana
smuggler Lea rich confirmed this account
he testified that Cesar Rodriguez a drug
trafficker who worked for Noriega had
established a two to three percent fee
for money laundering by his organization
the fee dropped to one percent for each
deposit over five million dollars the
services Cesar Rodriguez provided
included meeting the shipments of money
at the airport with armored cars
bodyguards and limousines and providing
continuous personal security while the
traffickers remained in Panama Panama
became so secure for money laundering
that the principal problem for the drug
traffickers was security for the money
as it left the United States not once it
reached Panama to solve this problem
the cartel experimented with dip
methods of handling funds in order to
prevent seizures often the money was
flown to Panama as commercial air
freight on either Braniff Airlines or
Eastern Airlines currency was shipped in
pallets or in containers the use of
palletized shipments was confirmed by an
Eastern pilot who testified that after
his plane landed in Panama
he watched pallets being unloaded from
his craft into waiting armored cars when
he inquired as to the nature of the
cargo he was informed that it was money
according to Roman million Rodriguez the
station managers for the airlines were
in the employ of general Noriega thus
ensuring that the currency cargoes
received special protection Noriega also
maintained an ownership interest in the
armored car business that met the planes
at the airport after being laundered
many of the drug profits of the cartel
deposited in Panamanian financial
institutions found their way back to
Colombia where they were invested in
newspapers radio stations television
stations soccer teams pharmaceutical
firms automobile agencies and
construction companies one money
launderers experienced in his
subcommittee testimony Millian Rodriguez
described his career as a money
launderer and explained the techniques
used by the major traffickers to handle
and invest their money as an accountant
in Miami million Rodriguez attracted
business from members of the Cuban exile
community who had turned from
shellfishing to drug trafficking
during the 1970s beginning on a modest
scale Milian Rodriguez took the
responsibility for counting packaging
and shipping his clients money to Panama
where the funds were deposited in a
local bank typically Rodriguez set up
the account at the Panamanian bank in
the name of a Panamanian corporation
created for the sole purpose of
receiving the one-time currency deposit
shortly after the initial two
posit the money would then be moved to
another group of accounts in the same
Bank that recache withdrawal in the form
of a tellers receipt this transaction
did not leave a paper trail to the
receiving accounts the money would then
be moved to a second bank in the form of
tellers notes and deposited to the
account of another group of dummy
Panamanian corporations further hiding
the source of the funds from there it
was transferred to a visible and on the
surface legitimate investment
corporation in the Netherlands Antilles
that corporation would in turn purchase
a wide range of assets as passive
investments including luxury real estate
stocks and bonds and other financial
instruments Milian Rodriguez testified
that in 1979 he established a cash
management system for Pablo Escobar a
key figure in the Medellin Cartel
million Rodriguez designed this system
to maximize profit and interest and
minimize risk as he described it
currency received from wholesale cocaine
purchases was delivered to cartel
operatives in the major cities around
the United States these cutouts and turn
passed the money to messengers who
delivered it to safe houses where
Colombians counted and bundled the money
and shipped it to consolidation points
for shipment to Panama the packaging and
shipment of currency was handled by
freight forwarding companies owned by
the cartel Lilian Rodriguez provided the
subcommittee with cardboard boxes that
had been designed to exact dimensions
for packing money and carried the logo
of the captive freight forwarder Milian
Rodriguez was convicted under federal
RICO statutes as a money launderer and
sentenced to 43 years in federal prison
in May 1983 he was arrested with 5.4
million dollars in cash as he attempted
to leave Fort Lauderdale for Panama on
his personal Learjet at the time of his
arrest
federal authorities touted him as the
biggest drug money launderer
in Florida
the US response to the problem by the
time the Subcommittee on narcotics and
terrorism began its investigation the
use of offshore banks by drug
traffickers already had received
significant attention by Congress
beginning in 1982 the permanent
Subcommittee on investigations of the
Senate government affairs committee
undertook a major investigation of the
use of banks trusts and companies and
offshore bank secrecy jurisdictions by
drug runners in the case of Panama the
subcommittee concluded that quote
the evidence indicates that a
significant percentage of the currency
and circulation in Panama was drug money
end quote
in the House of Representatives
congressman George Wortley Republican
New York a member of the Banking
Committee introduced a proposal which
would have authorized the Treasury
secretary to subject a wide range of
foreign financial institutions including
branches subsidiaries and affiliates of
institutions doing business in the
United States to the record-keeping and
reporting requirements of the Bank
Secrecy Act the House Banking Committee
included this proposal in HR 570 six the
money laundering bill that it reported
in August 1986 according to the
committee report HR report number 746
99th Congress second session 34 quote by
including Section six a in the bill the
committee's intent is to send a clear
and unmistakable message that it expects
United States financial institutions
doing business in this country to not
only abide by the letter of the law but
to live up to their moral responsibility
to fully cooperate in this country's
efforts to stamp out the illicit
trafficking of drugs end quote
foreign governments bankers and the
Treasury Department opposed the Wortley
provision from becoming a part of the
final drug bill passed by the Congress
in 1986 arguing that it represented an
unprecedented extraterritorial
application of US law a substitute
provision was an
included section one three six three
subsection C which required the
secretary of the Treasury to report to
Congress within one year on the extent
to which foreign branches are used to
facilitate money laundering to evade the
reporting requirements of the Bank
Secrecy Act to examine the issue of
extraterritoriality and to identify
methods of obtaining the cooperation of
foreign governments in July 1987 the
Treasury secretary submitted his report
to Congress in the report he stated that
quote Treasury is aware of very few
examples of Bank Secrecy Act or money
laundering cases involving transfers
through foreign branches of United
States financial institutions end quote
the secretary further noted that quote
because there is no accurate means of
determining how much money is laundered
through each type of financial
institution Treasury can offer no
reliable estimates on the amount of
money that may be laundered through
foreign branches of domestic financial
institutions end quote
effectiveness of current reporting
requirements in the wake of indictments
of a number of prominent US financial
institutions for their failure to abide
by the reporting requirements of the
Bank Secrecy Act the Congress in 1986
made it a crime to deposit large sums of
cash without providing basic information
about the depositor such as name address
and taxpayer identification this statute
applies to every bank broker and
financial institution in the country
including casinos that handle large sums
of cash depositor information or
currency transaction reports CTR are now
being filed at a rate of nearly 600,000
a month
the 1986 law and the data generated by
CTRs have begun to pay off more than 270
targets of suspicious activity have been
identified and there have been several
major prosecutions including the well
known Washington DC and New York City
Pizza connection case
and which a number of persons were
convicted in a major heroin smuggling
operation but while these laws have been
extremely effective in fighting
distributors of illegal narcotics in the
United States a major loophole has made
them entirely ineffective against drug
smugglers who operate from foreign
sanctuaries as the subcommittee
testimony detailed the drug traffickers
have developed systems to ship the money
generated by drug sales out of the US
for deposit in countries with strict
bank secrecy laws and then
electronically transfer these funds back
to the United States where they are
lawfully invested in income producing
assets summary and conclusions to
function the criminal organizations
which control the drug business must
have access to commercial banks willing
to take large amounts of US currency
anonymously
moreover they must be able to keep
secret the identity of the beneficial
owners of the secret accounts
restricting these to essential
requirements for successful money
laundering activities even imperfectly
is the most important action the United
States government can take in
challenging seriously the operations of
the large traffickers the Subcommittee
on narcotics and terrorism therefore
proposed that the secretary of the
Treasury negotiate agreements permitting
foreign banks to cooperate with US
narcotics investigations as a result of
an amendment sponsored by the Chairman
and ranking member of the subcommittee
senator john f Kerry and Senator Mitch
McConnell legislation incorporating this
proposal was included in the omnibus
drug bill passed at the close of the
100th Congress after passing the Senate
by a vote of 85 to 3 all banks both u.s.
and foreign owned which do business in
the United States should be required to
record US cash deposits in excess of
$10,000 as a condition of their u.s.
Charter or their right to Tran
for funds electronically into this
country the prompt negotiations of such
agreements with other countries as
mandated by the Omnibus drug bill of
1988 should be undertaken it is the
belief of the members of the
subcommittee that these agreements will
ensure that banks maintain a record on
the identity of anyone who conducts a
cash transaction in excess of $10,000
the records of such transactions would
be requested only in connection with a
narcotics investigation institutions
which choose not to comply with this
requirement should be denied access to
the US banking market and the financial
wire transfer network maintained by the
Federal Reserve
[Music]
this is our hidden history